+++
title = "An Invitation"
date = 2026-04-18
draft = true
+++

The other day I was thinking about what makes me, well, me. At first I thought genetics. However, even identical twins can be polar opposites; I realized it was not genetics. Then, I thought it was my ideas and experiences. While this is a large part of who I am, it is not who I am. Ideas borrow resources from our minds and bodies to grow, reproduce, and travel; I am not the set of ideas that resides within me. Neither am I my experiences. If you were to take someone else and show them everything I have seen and felt, I feel like they would understand me well; however, they did not *make* those choices, so my experiences are not me. Many people share similar ideas to me, many people share similar life experiences to me. While I relate to those similar to me, they are not me. So who am I?

I realized, then, that I am defined by my relationships with others. If you were to cut me out of the world, I would be the negative space left by the relationships I have established with others. My relationships to my parents and siblings, friends and close friends. Classmates, the unfocused whispers of friends of friends, strangers on the street or on the internet. Relationships with people who love me very dearly, and I love in turn; relationships with others who do not, which I may be afraid to repair. A relationship is, as I'll define it, who others believe us to be, both in thought and in action.

If I were to live a life of isolation, in that sense, who would I be? If a person is defined by their relationships, who are they if they never formed a relationship? One option is that we all form a relationship with ourselves, the cartesian "I" whom we address in our thoughts. And if not "I", then we are defined by how we act when we believe nobody else is watching; call this our relationship with God. Say we wish to become the best person we can. How should we go about doing that?

Working outwards in, if I want to be a good person, I must seek to develop good relationships with others. I must be patient and forgiving, kind, a listener. I must stand up for what I believe in, but not in a way that dominates or reduces the agency of others. I must be friendly and quick to make friends; I must be consistent in my care for others; I must move relationships through their natural course, and show up when others need me. I am not perfect in this respect, and I am sad that I am not who I believe myself to be for everyone. I need to work on healing my relationships with others. Not because I have done anything worthy of breaking them, but because relationships, like all other things, are subject to the natural laws of the universe and unless actively maintained must decay over time. I know this to be true, but why do I believe this?

Taking a step inward, quite simply, "I" cannot be someone I'm not. If others have contradictory opinions of me, that is a tension I must take before my "I" to resolve, and once resolved, it is a resolution I must present before others in both words and in action. Sometimes these tensions rest unaddressed, and our "I" remains divided, unaware. Even when unaddressed, to an outsider looking at the negative space, it is painfully obvious that our "I" is split. To resolve this split requires healing our relationship with who we believe ourselves to be. If we hope to become a better person, we must always choose the better "I". Choosing an "I" will cause us to act differently. These actions will change our relationships with others. Only after the tension has been addressed, and the negative space defined by our relationships with others is full, have we come to an understanding of who we are in a specific area. Like relationships with others, being honest and maintaining a relationship with who we believe our "I" to be and who we are in practice requires consistent introspection, change, and action. Someone with a strong sense of self is quick to confess mistakes and seeks to correct the consequences of actions that their new "I" wouldn't have done. When we become aware of two "I", two regions of negative space we could inhabit, how do we pick the better one?

Sometimes our choice of "I" is orthogonal to being good or bad. I prefer vanilla ice-cream to chocolate, and my friends might know that. Does it really matter? It might, if many of my friendships are predicated on the fact that I do. I think that preference is a very weak basis for friendship. Preferences do not have to be a part of our identity, and I often think it's better that they're not. But for choices of "I" that are not a pure matter of preference, what makes a good choice?

I believe one can answer this question for themselves by wrestling with this question: if we are alone, how do we choose act? I think this reveals, most purely, who we are. Do we act consistently with all relationships we have established, including our relationship with ourselves? I would define our relationship with God to be outlined by the thoughts and actions we entertain while we believe nobody else is watching. <span class=aside>I believe I first came across this idea in the *Theory of Moral Sentiments* when I was around 14? The idea turned out to be very formative in retrospect.</span>

Absent of beliefs of the "I", working to rectify the "I" when alone with the "I" when not, what is the best way to act, if you were to live a life of isolation? Here is where we must make a choice. For me, I think what is good, in this sense, is what nourishes and sustains our bodies and spirits. It is to sleep when we are tired, to work hard as our bodies allow, to eat food that gives us strength and prepares us for a new day, to look after our health, to explore and learn about this world, to pray and wrestle with questions of the spirit, to be grateful for and find beauty in hardship, to imagine a better world in which to find ourselves in and, as Thoreau would, to *live* in it in action, and to *work* for it to exist. A certain amount of solitude is healthy, but to grow we must seek the company of others and to learn from them; it is only with others that we can raise future generations. It is only with others that we can shape the world beyond the imagination of any one individual. These interactions require ground rules for collaboration, and they boil down to, "I will not do anything that grows what I am able to do at the expense of what you are able to do, and vice versa, without having you make that decision of your own free choice." To me, this is what is good; it is at least part of what I believe God believes to be good as well. Perhaps the greatest good is furthering life; to create the possibility of the exercise of choice where there was previously none before.

If I know that is good, how do I become better? This time, I work inside out. First, I must work on my relationship with God. I must act in accordance with what is good when alone. Second, I must work on my relationship with myself. I must believe that who "I" am is good, and if there is a contradiction, work to correct that contradiction in thought and in action. Third, I must be good to others. I must maintain relationships, apologize and correct mistakes when my actions have deviated from my beliefs, and work to better understand what others believe to be good as well, so I can better respect their agency. What is the basis for a strong relationship? Not should we only work to avoid decreasing the agency of others, but we should be *proactive* in increasing the agency of others. I define a strong relationship to be one that increases agency for both parties involved. The entire point of a relationship is to strengthen it for good.

When I am gone, who am I? I am the relationships that I carry with me. When those that love me or hate me are gone, who am I? I am the belief the people associate with my name. When my name is last spoken, who am I? I certainly don't think I'll be nothing. I'll be the consequences of the choices people were able to make because I existed. I will be, in other words, the agency I extended to others. If the future is one where the people affected by those choices live lives, that when alone, they choose to live in accordance with what is good, I'll have lived a good life. That's all one can ask for, anyway.

I don't need to wait for my name to have last been spoken, however, to ask whether the lives of those affected by the transitive closure of my choices are good. 

I can work to increase the agency of others today, and I invite you to to do the same. <span class=aside>If you're on the same page, I'd love to learn more about you. In the spirit of expanding the options avaliable to others, you can always reach out to me (c.f. About) or share these ideas with others.</span>

For starters, today I tended to some relationships that had atrophied; tomorrow I will do more of the same. (There are some people I love who I fear that I would hurt more by reaching out after a long period of silence. I need to remember that healing a relationship is always good. Always.)

<div class=boxed>

**Daily reading: [History Today, Life and Land in Anglo-Saxon England](https://archive.is/LpNs2) ([original](https://www.historytoday.com/archive/out-margins/life-and-land-anglo-saxon-england))**

> The word this poet uses for 'temporary' is læne, an evocative word frequently found in Old English literature. Though usually translated as 'transient' or 'fleeting', its literal meaning is more specific: it is related to modern English loan, so the real sense is that something læne has been 'lent', and can be taken back again.

</div>
