+++
title = "Cold reboot"
date = 2026-02-08
+++

Today is Sunday! What a great day. Today was absolutely freezing, and I just about froze my ears off while walking around. Luckily my friend Nathan saw me and spared me a beanie.

This week was good! I wanted to start writing daily and this week, I was able to hit my goal! Not counting today, since last Sunday, I've written 7,957 words. This post puts me over the 8 kiloword mark for the month. My longest post was [On craft and AI](/daily/2026-02-04/), at 2504 words. I started this week with a schedule of 12 classes to shop between and on Friday I submitted my final registration of 4 tough-but-interesting classes (`6.7800`, `6.4110`, `6.4950`, `24.118`). I also started up rowing and lifting with the team again; it's good to be back. I've also added all my assignments and work blocks to my calendar!

This week was unfortunately pretty chaotic. I met some pretty cool new people (you know who you are!) but missed a couple meetings due to scheduling conflicts last minute. (Sigh.) I wish I had more time in the day. 

On the nights I rowed the next morning, I slept pretty consistently. A couple nights, however, I stayed up later than I should have, to blog. Next week I hope to sleep consistently, blog consistently, and not miss anything. I also fasted for a friend.

As I have a couple assignments due next week, I need to prepare for the "great lock in" so I can be mostly free next weekend. I also don't want to miss any days of blogging, even if my blog posts are short. 

There are quite a few things on my mind next week. I've been thinking a lot about [Isocore](/daily/2026-02-07/), especially on how to keep the old-web integration low-overhead (e.g. not shipping an entire compiled-to-wasm runtime over the wire perhaps?), and how to do identity / authentication without falling prey to the classic issues of the difficulty of key management and so on. Sometime next week I'd like to write up my thoughts on epistemic and aleatoric uncertainty, and what is new in the [RND](https://arxiv.org/abs/1810.12894) space since 2018. I have a few important life decisions to make in the coming days. There are no right or wrong answers here, only right or wrong reasons, and I'm trying to hone in on the right reasons for making these decisions. Wish me luck!

Also, compulsory daily reading for your enjoyment:

<div class=boxed>

**Daily reading: [Fast, Patrick Collison](https://patrickcollison.com/fast)**

</div>
