+++
title = "Differential Datalog in 88 lines of Python"
date = 2026-02-19
draft = true
+++

Yesterday I talked about [symbolic grounding](@/daily/2026-02-18.md), so I figured, heck, for fun, let's implement differential datalog in 88 lines of Python! Can it be done? <span class=aside>Spoiler: Yes, I've had this code sitting on my disk for a while.</span>

# Datalog in 30 seconds

Datalog is a relational logic language. It lets you define facts and rules, and ask what things are logically true about whatever system we've defined. It's prolog's evil twin, and what SQL wishes it was.

A fact has a *name* and establishes a relationship between some *atoms*. If you're a fan of *Young Sheldon*, we could write:

```
mother(mary, sheldon)
mother(meemaw, mary)
```

A *rule* lets us use facts (and other rules) to find new relationships. For example, here's a rule that describes being a grandmother:

```
grandmother(X, Z) :-
  mother(X, Y), mother(Y, Z)
```

We can read this, "`X` is the `grandmother` of `Z`" if "`X` is the `mother` of `Y`" and "`Y` is the `mother` of `Z`".

The first part of the rule, before the `:-`, is called the *head*. The code after is the *body*. In the body, a comma means *and*. If we can find a set of atoms to assign to `X`, `Y`, and `Z` such that `mother(X, Y)` and `mother(Y, Z)` are true, we know `grandmother(X, Z)` is true as well.

(Note that, `X`, `Y`, and `Z` are variables. Unlike an atom, like `mary`, a variable is not bound to a particular value.)

Finally, datalog supports queries. After we've added facts and rules, we can ask questions. For example, "Who is `sheldon`'s `grandmother`?"

```
?- grandmother(X, sheldon)
X = meemaw
```

It's `meemaw`! Isn't that wonderful?

# Parse for understanding

First, we need to write a parser. Our parser will turn a literal like `mother(mary, sheldon)` into a simple python object we can manipulate directly. 

```python
import re
LITERAL = re.compile(r"(\w+)\(([^)]+)\)")
```

We import `re` for regular expressions. Here's a breakdown of the `LITERAL` regex:

```
(\w+)\(([^)]+)\)
(\w+)            The predicate name
     \(       \) Literal parenthesis ( )
       ([^)]+)   Everything else inside
```

The two sets of `(...)` are *capture groups*, they capture everything inside. With this regex, `mother(mary, sheldon)` becomes `("mother", "mary, sheldon")`. The first item is the literal's `name`, the second group are the literal's `args`.

We can `parse` a line by finding all literals, and then splitting the second capture group into a list of atoms/variables:

```python
def parse(s):
    return [(name, [v.strip() for v in args.split(",")])
            for name, args in LITERAL.findall(s)]
```

We'll also define a nice little helper `coerce` so atoms that are numbers can be python numbers. Nothing fancy:

```python
def coerce(s):
    try:    return int(s)
    except: return s
```

To check everything works, let's try parsing our `grandmother` rule from earlier:

```python
>>> parse('grandmother(X, Z) :- mother(X, Y), mother(Y, Z)')
[('grandmother', ['X', 'Z']), 
 ('mother', ['X', 'Y']),
 ('mother', ['Y', 'Z'])]
```

Amazing. When we wire everything up, we'll be a little linent here: a line with one literal is a fact, a line with multiple literals is a rule. <span class=aside>So elegant! /s</span>

With parsing out of the way, let's sketch things out at a high level.

# Under the hood

Datalog works by making a *table* for each type of *fact* and each type of *rule*. It then applies rules to all the tables until a fixed point is reached. Since we precompute all relations, a query just iterates over all (derived) rows in the relevant table and returns the matching results.

The *differential* in differential datalog means we can `insert` and `remove` facts at will. Instead of recomputing all tables when our facts change, differential datalog *propogates* the changes through the tables, until a new fixed point is reached.

For this to work, we keep track of a *multiplicity* for each fact. Inserting a fact increments the fact's multiplicity by `+1`, and remove decreses it, adding `-1`.

#  An empty database

We will write a class, `DDLog`, that implements the following interface:

```python
# make a new database, add a rule
db = DDLog
db.rule("grandmother(X, Z) :- mother(X, Y), mother(Y, Z)")

# add facts and query the database!
db.insert("mother(mary, sheldon)")
db.insert("mother(meemaw, mary)")
result = db.query("grandmother(X, sheldon)")
assert [{"X": "meemaw"}] == result

# remove facts, and query results change
db.remove("mother(meemaw, mary)")
assert [] == db.query("grandmother(X, sheldon)")
```

The three key APIs are `insert`, `remove` and `query`. We'll implement some primitives, and then compose them to provide this nice interface to the user.



We use `defaultdict` for dictionaries with default values for missing keys.

```python
from collections import defaultdict
```

<div class=boxed>

**Daily reading: [Jike, The obscure social media app beloved by China's tech scene](https://restofworld.org/2023/china-tech-workers-investors-founders-app)**

</div>
