+++
title = "Seeds of a Digital Garden"
date = 2025-04-25

[extra]
artbit = "doorstep.png"
+++

<div class="boxed">

*N.B.* I'm publishing some gems from writing I did over the course of two years while living in Brazil. Read [the first post](/blog/writing) for more context.

</div>

<p class="tag">2022-12-03 · Isaac Clayton · 87 minutes spent</p>

One problem I often run into when I start writing is that I have either
too *few* ideas or too *many*. To put an idea on a page, we have to
isolate it, find its form, and pin it down. Unfortunately, ideas are
slippery things: it is hard to straighten a slippery tangle of thoughts
into a single, coherent thread. We want to have clear ideas to write
about, because clear ideas lead to clear writing.

# A garden in the wilderness

To that end, suppose our mind is a little patch of wilderness in which
wild ideas take root. Though many interesting ideas may find fertile
ground, they will be choked out unless tended to. If our goal is to
consistently harvest the best ideas to write about, we have to gradually
cultivate this wilderness until it resembles something of a garden. Like
a gardener, we can't wrestle this tangle of weeds and ideas with bare
hands alone: we need gloves and tools to direct and magnify our efforts.

So in this essay, I hope to outline some techniques we can use and
habits we can build to tend to our digital garden.

# Squaring off a plot

A digital garden is a digital space we use to cultivate ideas. Like any
good gardener, before we plant any seeds, we must first plot out our
garden and prepare the soil for planting. It really doesn't matter where
you start your digital garden, because unlike physical gardens, digital
gardens are relatively easy to move around and replant elsewhere. So
hide the clutter on your desktop, open up a fresh browser pane, create a
new document—text file, Google doc, Notion block, or otherwise—and start
plotting out your garden.

Things will be a little messy at first, but we're dealing with plants
and dirt, not permanent stone. It's okay to make mistakes. The first
thing you're going to want to do, though, is to make your digital garden
easily accessible. Don't leave it floating in cyber-space, lay down a
little path between your home (screen) and your (digital) garden.
Whether that be a bookmark in your browser or alias on your desktop is
up to you, just make sure you keep the path visible and well-groomed,
lest it becomes overgrown with wayward bits.

# Questions are seeds for ideas

If our goal is to harvest ideas, we need some sort of seeds from which
ideas spring. What better seed exists than those of *Questions*?

This first document you've created (the first of many) will be a little
nursery for the seeds you encounter while jungling through The Internet.
This is where your *Questions* go.

> When creating a new page in my digital garden, I like to start with a
> title, a date, and a short description of how the document is organized,
> roughly. While this description acts as loose schema now, over time the
> organization of the document will become entrenched as we build habits
> respecting it.

Your *Questions* document doesn't have to be anything fancy… *at first*.
It could start as a list of questions, and the date they were asked on,
for instance. (Recording dates is important: it is better to have a date
and not need it than to need a date and not have it.)

How to find questions is, well, another question, of course. (Maybe you
could add that to your *Questions* page!) While browsing the interwebs,
just keep your *Questions* page open in the background: when a moment of
inspiration strikes, you now have a place to reify that seed of thought:
write it down.

# Nursing seeds into outlines

Questions are important, but alone they are just seeds. We need to plant
them, water them, give them plenty of sun, and a little space to grow.
Enter, the humble *Outline*.

An outline is nothing fancy. It is a supple collection of phrases,
arranged in hierarchy, tracing out the hills and valleys of a particular
thread of thought. Find your most interesting questions (perhaps marking
them with a star): these are seeds you are ready to plant.

For each ready seed, you can sketch an outline. When and where you
sketch an outline are up to you. You could set a daily goal, do it as
you come across new ideas, directly in-line, or on a new page. As you
sketch more outlines, you will get better at organizing them.

# From nursery to garden proper

Once an outline gets too large to conveniently exist in line, it is
definitely time to move it to another page. So create a new document,
and *copy* the question and outline there. You are now free to remove
the outline from your *Questions* document, but be sure to *link* to the
new page!

Figuring out how to make a strong link is important. If your digital
garden exists on the web, you are lucky that hyperlinks exist. If you
have used a text file, you might be experiencing some growing pains.
These pains are natural, and indeed… oddly desirable. Look to figure out
how to make links work: you could host your text file on the web, switch
to a tool like Obsidian, use a fancier text editor like Emacs (with the
right plugins), or roll something of a home-grown solution, a program of
your own. (A word of warning: you are building a digital garden, not
something that builds digital gardens. Forsake abstraction: do not lose
sight of your original goal.)

Once you have plotted out a *Questions* page and a manner to link to
your steadily-growing outlines, remember that a garden requires care and
weeding. Some outlines will grow blazingly fast, and start to deviate
from the original question they were designed to answer. You must weed
and prune your outlines.

# Pruning and replanting

Some growths within an outline are interesting in their own right. A
weed is only a plant that is growing in the wrong place: that plant
might have a home elsewhere in your garden. Thoroughly weed and prune
your outline, keeping it healthy. Move interesting seeds to their own
plot; cast any wicked tangents into the composting bin. It is important
to keep a tidy garden: we are trying to *tame* the wild growth rather
than letting it grow unbounded.

Our sprouting outlines are cute and fun to care for, but hold no weight
as a productive plant that will bear fruit. Our ideas have not yet taken
root. We must allow young ideas to settle more permanently in the soil
of our minds. Like a plant spreading its leaves and taking root, we must
turn our outline into weightier paragraphs.

# From outline to essay

Once pruned, supported, and refined, an outline should hold a single,
easy-to-follow thread of thought that marks the shape of a fully-grown
plant. The thread of an outline should fully address the question at
hand. Once ready, grow an outline into paragraphs by translating one
point at a time, each point mapping to a paragraph. Although the growth
of paragraphs may be a little wild and uncultivated, it is best to let
them grow out fully, lest they wither because of premature pruning.

Once an idea has taken root and sprouted into a wild mass of greenery,
it is time to prune and refine our plant until we coax out the fruit of
our labors. Reading the unfurled outline top to bottom, we can discover
inconsistencies, dead branches, unneeded explanation, and lopsided
details. With a shear in hand, trim out these wayward paragraphs. Though
it is hard to remove writing, do it for the good of the idea as a whole.

# Seeds of new ideas, the fruit of your labor

At this stage you should have a healthy plant growing firmly in a corner
of your garden. The fruit of your labors is a complete answer to the
question you originally posed, which hopefully contains many seeds for
future questions. It may be tempting to leave this answer as-is, but we
are far from done. A good gardener knows it is best to continue to care
for even fully-grown plants.

Revisit old ideas from time to time. Let them grow out a little more,
then prune and refine them. Gradual editing and improvement is key to
caring for healthy plants. Lay down paths within your garden, linking
ideas together. Add signs and labels to make it harder to get lost. Add
benches as points to rest and admire. Every garden is a little
different, from backyard to botanical; work on your garden daily, and
make it your own.

# Tending to a growing garden

Although questions are effective seeds, they are far from the only seeds
that exist. As part of the questions you ask yourself, ask questions as
to how you can improve your garden. Building a garden is more than just
planting seeds: it requires building fences, laying paths, careful
weeding, and so on. You will sweat a little.

To extend your garden, you could start recording the things you read
alongside the questions that arise. You could start keeping a journal to
record what happens each day. You could embark on larger projects,
linking together a series of ideas to landscape a larger vista. Don't
limit yourselves to words alone. Ideas come in far more shapes than
lines of symbols on a page. Figure out how to draw. How to link
sequences of drawings together. How to create little interactive worlds
that illustrate ideas better than any words or pictures could. This may
be hard; the tools you might need might not exist yet. Don't let that
stop you.
